Tempdir() (#43)
r-devel/cran-cookbook: website/code_issues.qmd

--------------------------

# Writing Files and Directories to the Home Filespace

## Problem

> You are writing by default or in your examples, vignettes or tests in the user's home filespace, including the package directory and `getwd()`.

Author: Will change this.

## Solution 

Omit any default path in your functions and write to `tempdir()` in examples, vignettes or tests.  

### Details

<!--adding this is a test for including the CRAN mail "template" for each recipe. This version is a small collapsible text box which I will add for (almost) every Issue. Maybe change the title of the boxes?--> 

> ::: {.callout-note title="Comment of CRAN maintainers" appearance="simple" icon=false collapse=true}

Reviewer: I think the collapsible feature is good here. Perhaps we could change the title of the callout? (since they will be with nearly every recipe), here are some ideas 💡 :

- Comments from CRAN Maintainers
- CRAN Review Communication
- CRAN Review Feedback

Author: Yeah, makes sense. I also wasn't quite happy with the title. I think, I like "CRAN Review Communication" best. Maybe we come up with an even better title in the future but for now let's stick to that.

> Please ensure that your functions do not write by default or in your examples/vignettes/tests in the user's home filespace (including the package directory and getwd()). This is not allowed by CRAN policies. Please omit any default path in writing functions. In your examples/vignettes/tests you can write to tempdir().

Reviewer 2: I would clarify that the default path, if any, could be `tempdir()`. 
I find it easier to understand than firs prohibiting to do something and then explaining how to do it "safely". 

I probably didn't capture well the distinction between not doing on CRAN and generally but still allowing that (I'm thinking on {datapasta} or {usethis} for example). Here is my suggestion:

```suggestion
Please ensure that your functions do not write by default in your examples,  vignettes, and tests or in the user's home filespace (including the package directory and `getwd()`). Please avoid any default path in writing functions (on CRAN), `tempdir()` can be used if needed .
```

Author: I guess you're right. But this text is the template the CRAN team has been using for years now. So for now I won't change anything here. But if there are new templates I will adapt accordingly.

Reviewer 2: Are these templates shared somewhere? I didn't find them in the R-dev-web repo with the scripts checking the QA of packages.

In this case, it might be a good feedback to pass to the CRAN team to consider if the template can be reviewed/updated, as there are new recommendations like `tools::R_user_dir()` that are not included in the template answer.

Author: They are not shared (yet) as far as I know. But we want to add them to the corresponding recipes in the cookbook. 

Maybe I will discuss with the team if we should update those templates. 
Small note: They are only used for the newbie-queue by the submissions team for new submissions.

:::

> The [CRAN Repository Policy](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/policies.html) states that:

Reviewer 2: I guess that CRAN Repository Policy is linked a lot. 
With Markdown one can name a link and use that instead of repeating the link multiple times. Maybe have them on index.qmd and reuse across the book like [Bioconductor does](https://github.com/Bioconductor/pkgrevdocs/blob/devel/index.Rmd#L55), this way is easier to change if anything happens to the url and the text is shorter and cleaner in qmd.

> The code and examples provided in a package should never do anything which might be regarded as malicious or anti-social.

and gives as example:

> > Packages should not write in the user’s home filespace (including clipboards), nor anywhere else on the file system apart from the R session’s temporary directory (or during installation in the location pointed to by TMPDIR: and such usage should be cleaned up). Installing into the system’s R installation (e.g., scripts to its bin directory) is not allowed.

Reviewer 2: It is known that it is allowed to write to clipboards or other places. But not on CRAN or by default on users' machines. I think the wording should be relaxed a little bit.

> > Packages should not write in the user’s home filespace (including clipboards), nor anywhere else on the file system apart from the R session’s temporary directory (or during installation in the location pointed to by TMPDIR: and such usage should be cleaned up). Installing into the system’s R installation (e.g., scripts to its bin directory) is not allowed.

Author: I quoted the CRAN policy. Not much I can do here for rephrasing.

> Packages can write per default to `tempdir()`, or any other temporary/cache directory, or have no default path at all, as long as the default is not the user's home filespace.  

Reviewer 2: Current recommendation is using `tools::R_user_dir()` if package can depend on R 4.0 >= :

>For R version 4.0 or later (hence a version dependency is required or only conditional use is possible), packages may store user-specific data, configuration and cache files in their respective user directories obtained from tools::R_user_dir(), provided that by default sizes are kept as small as possible and the contents are actively managed (including removing outdated material). 

I didn't modify the code of CRAN maintainers above to include this, but I think a mention would be helpful to package maintainers.
